					Preface

Database management has evolved from a specialized computer application to a cen-
tral component of virtually all enterprises, and, as a result, knowledge about database

systems has become an essential part of an education in computer science. In this text,
we present the fundamental concepts of database management. These concepts include
aspects of database design, database languages, and database-system implementation.

This text is intended for a first course in databases at the junior or senior under-
graduate, or first-year graduate, level. In addition to basic material for a first course,

the text contains advanced material that can be used for course supplements, or as
introductory material for an advanced course.
We assume only a familiarity with basic data structures, computer organization,
and a high-level programming language such as Java, C, C++, or Python. We present
concepts as intuitive descriptions, many of which are based on our running example of
a university. Important theoretical results are covered, but formal proofs are omitted.
In place of proofs, figures and examples are used to suggest why a result is true. Formal
descriptions and proofs of theoretical results may be found in research papers and
advanced texts that are referenced in the bibliographical notes.
The fundamental concepts and algorithms covered in the book are often based
on those used in existing commercial or experimental database systems. Our aim is
to present these concepts and algorithms in a general setting that is not tied to one
particular database system, though we do provide references to specific systems where
appropriate.

In this, the seventh edition of Database System Concepts, we have retained the over-
all style of the prior editions while evolving the content and organization to reflect the

changes that are occurring in the way databases are designed, managed, and used. One
such major change is the extensive use of “Big Data” systems. We have also taken into
account trends in the teaching of database concepts and made adaptations to facilitate
these trends where appropriate.

xv

xvi Preface
Among the notable changes in this edition are:
• Extensive coverage of Big Data systems, from the user perspective (Chapter 10),
as well as from an internal perspective (Chapter 20 through Chapter 23), with
extensive additions and modifications compared to the sixth edition.
• A new chapter entitled “Blockchain Databases” (Chapter 26) that introduces

blockchain technology and its growing role in enterprise applications. An im-
portant focus in this chapter is the interaction between blockchain systems and

database systems.

• Updates to all chapters covering database internals (Chapter 12 through Chap-
ter 19) to reflect current-generation technology, such as solid-state disks, main-
memory databases, multi-core systems, and column-stores.

• Enhanced coverage of semi-structured data management using JSON, RDF, and
SPARQL (Section 8.1).
• Updated coverage of temporal data (in Section 7.10), data analytics (Chapter 11),
and advanced indexing techniques such as write-optimized indices (Section 14.8
and Section 24.2).
• Reorganization and update of chapters to better support courses with a significant
hands-on component (which we strongly recommend for any database course),
including use of current-generation application development tools and Big Data
systems such as Apache Hadoop and Spark.
These and other updates have arisen from the many comments and suggestions we
have received from readers of the sixth edition, our students at Yale University, Lehigh
University, and IIT Bombay, and our own observations and analyses of developments
in database technology.

Content of This Book
The text is organized in eleven major parts.

• Overview (Chapter 1). Chapter 1 provides a general overview of the nature and pur-
pose of database systems. We explain how the concept of a database system has

developed, what the common features of database systems are, what a database
system does for the user, and how a database system interfaces with operating

systems. We also introduce an example database application: a university organi-
zation consisting of multiple departments, instructors, students, and courses. This

application is used as a running example throughout the book. This chapter is
motivational, historical, and explanatory in nature.

Preface xvii

• Part 1: Relational Model and SQL (Chapter 2 through Chapter 5). Chapter 2 in-
troduces the relational model of data, covering basic concepts such as the struc-
ture of relational databases, database schemas, keys, schema diagrams, relational

query languages, relational operations, and the relational algebra. Chapter 3, Chap-
ter 4, and Chapter 5 focus on the most influential of the user-oriented relational

languages: SQL. The chapters in this part describe data manipulation: queries,
updates, insertions, and deletions, assuming a schema design has been provided.
Although data-definition syntax is covered in detail here, schema design issues are
deferred to Part 2.
• Part 2: Database Design (Chapter 6 and Chapter 7). Chapter 6 provides an

overview of the database-design process and a detailed description of the entity-
relationship data model. The entity-relationship data model provides a high-level

view of the issues in database design and of the problems encountered in capturing
the semantics of realistic applications within the constraints of a data model. UML

class-diagram notation is also covered in this chapter. Chapter 7 introduces rela-
tional database design. The theory of functional dependencies and normalization

is covered, with emphasis on the motivation and intuitive understanding of each
normal form. This chapter begins with an overview of relational design and relies
on an intuitive understanding of logical implication of functional dependencies.
This allows the concept of normalization to be introduced prior to full coverage of
functional-dependency theory, which is presented later in the chapter. Instructors
may choose to use only this initial coverage without loss of continuity. Instructors

covering the entire chapter will benefit from students having a good understand-
ing of normalization concepts to motivate them to learn some of the challenging

concepts of functional-dependency theory. The chapter ends with a section on
modeling of temporal data.
• Part 3: Application Design and Development (Chapter 8 and Chapter 9). Chapter

8 discusses several complex data types that are particularly important for appli-
cation design and development, including semi-structured data, object-based data,

textual data, and spatial data. Although the popularity of XML in a database con-
text has been diminishing, we retain an introduction to XML, while adding coverage

of JSON, RDF, and SPARQL. Chapter 9 discusses tools and technologies that are

used to build interactive web-based and mobile database applications. This chap-
ter includes detailed coverage on both the server side and the client side. Among

the topics covered are servlets, JSP, Django, JavaScript, and web services. Also

discussed are application architecture, object-relational mapping systems includ-
ing Hibernate and Django, performance (including caching using memcached and

Redis), and the unique challenges in ensuring web-application security.
• Part 4: Big Data Analytics (Chapter 10 and Chapter 11). Chapter 10 provides
an overview of large-scale data-analytic applications, with a focus on how those
applications place distinct demands on data management compared with the de-

xviii Preface

mands of traditional database applications. The chapter then discusses how those
demands are addressed. Among the topics covered are Big Data storage systems

including distributed file systems, key-value stores and NoSQL systems, MapRe-
duce, Apache Spark, streaming data, and graph databases. The connection of these

systems and concepts with database concepts introduced earlier is emphasized.
Chapter 11 discusses the structure and use of systems designed for large-scale data
analysis. After first explaining the concepts of data analytics, business intelligence,
and decision support, the chapter discusses the structure of a data warehouse and
the process of gathering data into a warehouse. The chapter next covers usage of

warehouse data in OLAP applications followed by a survey of data-mining algo-
rithms and techniques.

• Part 5: Storage Management and Indexing (Chapter 12 through Chapter 14). Chap-
ter 12 deals with storage devices and how the properties of those devices influ-
ence database physical organization and performance. Chapter 13 deals with data-
storage structures, including file organization and buffer management. A variety of

data-access techniques are presented in Chapter 14. Multilevel index-based access
is described, culminating in detailed coverage of B+-trees. The chapter then covers

index structures for applications where the B+-tree structure is less appropriate, in-
cluding write-optimized indices such as LSM trees and buffer trees, bitmap indices,

and the indexing of spatial data using k-d trees, quadtrees and R-trees.

• Part 6: Query Processing and Optimization (Chapter 15 and Chapter 16). Chap-
ter 15 and Chapter 16 address query-evaluation algorithms and query optimiza-
tion. Chapter 15 focuses on algorithms for the implementation of database opera-
tions, particularly the wide range of join algorithms, which are designed to work on

very large data that may not fit in main-memory. Query processing techniques for
main-memory databases are also covered in this chapter. Chapter 16 covers query
optimization, starting by showing how query plans can be transformed to other
equivalent plans by using transformation rules. The chapter then describes how
to generate estimates of query execution costs, and how to efficiently find query
execution plans with the lowest cost.
• Part 7: Transaction Management (Chapter 17 through Chapter 19). Chapter 17

focuses on the fundamentals of a transaction-processing system: atomicity, con-
sistency, isolation, and durability. It provides an overview of the methods used

to ensure these properties, including log-based recovery and concurrency control

using locking, timestamp-based techniques, and snapshot isolation. Courses re-
quiring only a survey of the transaction concept can use Chapter 17 on its own

without the other chapters in this part; those chapters provide significantly greater
depth. Chapter 18 focuses on concurrency control and presents several techniques

for ensuring serializability, including locking, timestamping, and optimistic (vali-
dation) techniques. Multiversion concurrency control techniques, including the

widely used snapshot isolation technique, and an extension of the technique that

Preface xix
guarantees serializability, are also covered. This chapter also includes discussion
of weak levels of consistency, concurrency on index structures, concurrency in

main-memory database systems, long-duration transactions, operation-level con-
currency, and real-time transaction processing. Chapter 19 covers the primary

techniques for ensuring correct transaction execution despite system crashes and
storage failures. These techniques include logs, checkpoints, and database dumps,
as well as high availability using remote backup systems. Recovery with early lock

release, and the widely used ARIES algorithm are also presented. This chapter in-
cludes discussion of recovery in main-memory database systems and the use of

NVRAM.
• Part 8: Parallel and Distributed Databases (Chapter 20 through Chapter 23).
Chapter 20 covers computer-system architecture, and describes the influence of
the underlying computer system on the database system. We discuss centralized

systems, client–server systems, parallel and distributed architectures, and cloud-
based systems in this chapter. The remaining three chapters in this part address

distinct aspects of parallel and distributed databases, with Chapter 21 covering

storage and indexing, Chapter 22 covering query processing, and Chapter 23 cov-
ering transaction management. Chapter 21 includes discussion of partitioning and

data skew, replication, parallel indexing, distributed file systems (including the
Hadoop file system), and parallel key-value stores. Chapter 22 includes discussion

of parallelism both among multiple queries and within a single query. It covers par-
allel and distributed sort and join, MapReduce, pipelining, the Volcano exchange-
operator model, thread-level parallelism, streaming data, and the optimization of

geographically distributed queries. Chapter 23 includes discussion of traditional
distributed consensus such as two-phase commit and more sophisticated solutions

including Paxos and Raft. It covers a variety of algorithms for distributed concur-
rency control, including replica management and weaker degrees of consistency.

The trade-offs implied by the CAP theorem are discussed along with the means of
detecting inconsistency using version vectors and Merkle trees.
• Part 9: Advanced Topics (Chapter 24 through Chapter 26). Chapter 24 expands
upon the coverage of indexing in Chapter 14 with detailed coverage of the LSM

tree and its variants, bitmap indices, spatial indexing, and dynamic hashing tech-
niques. Chapter 25 expands upon the coverage of Chapter 9 with a discussion of

performance tuning, benchmarking, testing, and migration from legacy systems,
standardization, and distributed directory systems. Chapter 26 looks at blockchain
technology from a database perspective. It describes blockchain data structures
and the use of cryptographic hash functions and public-key encryption to ensure
the blockchain properties of anonymity, irrefutability, and tamper resistance. It

describes and compares the distributed consensus algorithms used to ensure de-
centralization, including proof-of-work, proof-of-stake, and Byzantine consensus.

Much of the chapter focuses on the features that make blockchain an important
database concept, including the role of permisssioned blockchains, the encoding

xx Preface

of business logic and agreements in smart contracts, and interoperability across

blockchains. Techniques for achieving database-scale transaction-processing per-
formance are discussed. A final section surveys current and contemplated enter-
prise blockchain applications.

• Part 10: Appendix. Appendix A presents details of our university schema, including
the full schema, DDL, and all the tables.
• Part 11: Online Chapters (Chapter 27 through Chapter 32) available online at
db-book.com. We provide six chapters that cover material that is of historical

nature or is advanced; these chapters are available only online. Chapter 27 cov-
ers “pure” query languages: the tuple and domain relational calculus and Data-
log, which has a syntax modeled after the Prolog language. Chapter 28 covers

advanced topics in relational database design, including the theory of multivalued
dependencies and fourth normal form, as well as higher normal forms. Chapter
29 covers object-based databases and more complex data types such as array, and

multiset types, as well as tables that are not in 1NF. Chapter 30 expands on the cov-
erage in Chapter 8 of XML. Chapter 31 covers information retrieval, which deals

with querying of unstructured textual data. Chapter 32 provides an overview of the

PostgreSQL database system, and is targeted at courses focusing on database inter-
nals. The chapter is likely to be particularly useful for supporting student projects

that work with the open-source code base of the PostgreSQL database.
At the end of each chapter we provide references in a section titled Further Reading.
This section is intentionally abbreviated and provides references that allow students
to continue their study of the material covered in the chapter or to learn about new
developments in the area covered by the chapter. On occasion, the further reading
section includes original source papers that have become classics of which everyone
should be aware. Detailed bibliographical notes for each chapter are available online,
and provide references for readers who wish to go into further depth on any of the
topics covered in the chapter.

The Seventh Edition
The production of this seventh edition has been guided by the many comments and
suggestions we received concerning the earlier editions, by our own observations while
teaching at Yale University, Lehigh University, and IIT Bombay, and by our analysis of
the directions in which database technology is evolving.
We provided a list of the major new features of this edition earlier in this preface;
these include coverage of extensive coverage of Big Data, updates to all chapters to

reflect current generation hardware technology, semi-structured data management, ad-
vanced indexing techniques, and a new chapter on blockchain databases. Beyond these

major changes, we revised the material in each chapter, bringing the older material

Preface xxi

up-to-date, adding discussions on recent developments in database technology, and im-
proving descriptions of topics that students found difficult to understand. We have also

added new exercises and updated references.
For instructors who previously used the sixth edition, we list the more significant
changes below:

• Relational algebra has been moved into Chapter 2, to help students better under-
stand relational operations that form the basis of query languages such as SQL.

Deeper coverage of relational algebra also aids in understanding the algebraic op-
erators needed for discussion later of query processing and optimization. The two

variants of the relational calculus are now in an online chapter, since we believe

they are now of value only to more theoretically oriented courses, and can be omit-
ted by most database courses.

• The SQL chapters now include more details of database-system specific SQL vari-
ations, to aid students carrying out practical assignments. Connections between

SQL and the multiset relational algebra are also covered in more detail. Chapter
4 now covers all the material concerning joins, whereas previously natural join
was in the preceding chapter. Coverage of sequences used to generate unique key
values, and coverage of row-level security have also been added to this chapter.
Recent extensions to the JDBC API that are particularly useful are now covered in
Chapter 5; coverage of OLAP has been moved from this chapter to Chapter 11.

• Chapter 6 has been modified to cover E-R diagrams along with E-R concepts, in-
stead of first covering the concepts and then introducing E-R diagrams as was done

in earlier editions. We believe this will help students better comprehend the E-R
model.
• Chapter 7 now has improved coverage of temporal data modeling, including
SQL:2011 temporal database features.

• Chapter 8 is a new chapter that covers complex data types, including semi-
structured data, such as XML, JSON, RDF, and SPARQL, object-based data, textual

data, and spatial data. Object-based databases, XML, and information retrieval on

textual data were covered in detail in the sixth edition; these topics have been ab-
breviated and covered in Chapter 8, while the original chapters from the sixth

edition have now been made available online.

• Chapter 9 has been significantly updated to reflect modern application devel-
opment tools and techniques, including extended coverage of JavaScript and

JavaScript libraries for building dynamic web interfaces, application development

in Python using the Django framework, coverage of web services, and disconnec-
tion operations using HTML5. Object-relation mapping using Django has been

added, as also discussion of techniques for developing high-performance applica-
tions that can handle large transaction loads.

xxii Preface

• Chapter 10 is a new chapter on Big Data, covering Big Data concepts and tools
from a user perspective. Big Data storage systems, the MapReduce paradigm,

Apache Hadoop and Apache Spark, and streaming and graph databases are cov-
ered in this chapter. The goal is to enable readers to use Big Data systems, with

only a summary coverage of what happens behind the scenes. Big Data internals
are covered in detail in later chapters.

• The chapter on storage and file structure has been split into two chapters. Chap-
ter 12 which covers storage has been updated with new technology, including ex-
panded coverage of flash memory, column-oriented storage, and storage organiza-
tion in main-memory databases. Chapter 13, which covers data storage structures

has been expanded, and now covers details such as free-space maps, partitioning,
and most importantly column-oriented storage.
• Chapter 14 on indexing now covers write-optimized index structures including the
LSM tree and its variants, and the buffer tree, which are seeing increasing usage.
Spatial indices are now covered briefly in this chapter. More detailed coverage of
LSM trees and spatial indices is provided in Chapter 24, which covers advanced
indexing techniques. Bitmap indices are now covered in brief in Chapter 14, while

more detailed coverage has been moved to Chapter 24. Dynamic hashing tech-
niques have been moved into Chapter 24, since they are of limited practical im-
portance today.

• Chapter 15 on query processing has significantly expanded coverage of pipelining
in query processing, new material on query processing in main-memory, including
query compilation, as well as brief coverage of spatial joins. Chapter 16 on query
optimization has more examples of equivalence rules for operators such as outer
joins and aggregates, has updated material on statistics for cost estimation, an
improved presentation of the join-order optimization algorithm. Techniques for
decorrelating nested subqueries using semijoin and antijoin operations have also
been added.
• Chapter 18 on concurrency control has new material on concurrency control in

main-memory. Chapter 19 on recovery now gives more importance to high avail-
ability using remote backup systems.

• Our coverage of parallel and distributed databases has been completely revamped.

Because of the evolution of these two areas into a continuum from low-level paral-
lelism to geographically distributed systems, we now present these topics together.

° Chapter 20 on database architectures has been significantly updated from the
earlier edition, including new material on practical interconnection networks

like the tree-like (or fat-tree) architecture, and significantly expanded and up-
dated material on shared-memory architectures and cache coherency. There is

an entirely new section on cloud-based services, covering virtual machines and
containers, platform-as-a-service, software-as-a-service, and elasticity.

Preface xxiii
° Chapter 21 covers parallel and distributed storage; while a few parts of this

chapter were present in the sixth edition, such as partitioning techniques, ev-
erything else in this chapter is new.

° Chapter 22 covers parallel and distributed query processing. Again only a few
sections of this chapter, such as parallel algorithms for sorting, join, and a few
other relational operations, were present in the sixth edition, almost everything
else in this chapter is new.
° Chapter 23 covers parallel and distributed transaction processing. A few parts

of this chapter, such as the sections on 2PC, persistent messaging, and concur-
rency control in distributed databases, are new but almost everything else in

this chapter is new.
As in the sixth edition, we facilitate the following of our running example by listing

the database schema and the sample relation instances for our university database to-
gether in Appendix A as well as where they are used in the various regular chapters. In

addition, we provide, on our web site db-book.com, SQL data-definition statements for
the entire example, along with SQL statements to create our example relation instances.
This encourages students to run example queries directly on a database system and to
experiment with modifying those queries. All topics not listed above are updated from
the sixth edition, though their overall organization is relatively unchanged.
End of Chapter Material
Each chapter has a list of review terms, in addition to a summary, which can help
readers review key topics covered in the chapter.
As in the sixth edition, the exercises are divided into two sets: practice exercises
and exercises. The solutions for the practice exercises are publicly available on the web
site of the book. Students are encouraged to solve the practice exercises on their own
and later use the solutions on the web site to check their own solutions. Solutions to
the other exercises are available only to instructors (see “Instructor’s Note,” below, for
information on how to get the solutions).

Many chapters have a tools section at the end of the chapter that provides infor-
mation on software tools related to the topic of the chapter; some of these tools can

be used for laboratory exercises. SQL DDL and sample data for the university database
and other relations used in the exercises are available on the web site of the book and
can be used for laboratory exercises.
Instructor’s Note
It is possible to design courses by using various subsets of the chapters. Some of the
chapters can also be covered in an order different from their order in the book. We
outline some of the possibilities here:

xxiv Preface

• Chapter 5 (Advanced SQL). This chapter can be skipped or deferred to later with-
out loss of continuity. We expect most courses will cover at least Section 5.1.1 early,

as JDBC is likely to be a useful tool in student projects.
• Chapter 6 (E-R Model). This chapter can be covered ahead of Chapter 3, Chapter
4, and Chapter 5 if you so desire, since Chapter 6 does not have any dependency
on SQL. However, for courses with a programming emphasis, a richer variety of
laboratory exercises is possible after studying SQL, and we recommend that SQL
be covered before database design for such courses.
• Chapter 15 (Query Processing) and Chapter 16 (Query Optimization). These
chapters can be omitted from an introductory course without affecting coverage
of any other chapter.
• Part 7 (Transaction Management). Our coverage consists of an overview (Chapter
17) followed by chapters with details. You might choose to use Chapter 17 while

omitting Chapter 18 and Chapter 19, if you defer these latter chapters to an ad-
vanced course.

• Part 8 (Parallel and Distributed Databases). Our coverage consists of an overview
(Chapter 20), followed by chapters on the topics of storage, query processing,
and transactions. You might choose to use Chapter 20 while omitting Chapter 21
through Chapter 23 if you defer these latter chapters to an advanced course.
• Part 11 (Online chapters). Chapter 27 (Formal-Relational Query Languages). This
chapter can be covered immediately after Chapter 2, ahead of SQL. Alternatively,
this chapter may be omitted from an introductory course. The five other online
chapters (Advanced Relational Database Design, Object-Based Databases, XML,

Information Retrieval, and PostgreSQL) can be used as self-study material or omit-
ted from an introductory course.

Model course syllabi, based on the text, can be found on the web site of the book.
Web Site and Teaching Supplements
A web site for the book is available at the URL: db-book.com. The web site contains:
• Slides covering all the chapters of the book.
• Answers to the practice exercises.
• The six online chapters.
• Laboratory material, including SQL DDL and sample data for the university
schema and other relations used in exercises, and instructions for setting up and
using various database systems and tools.
• An up-to-date errata list.

Preface xxv

The following additional material is available only to faculty:
• An instructor’s manual containing solutions to all exercises in the book.
• A question bank containing extra exercises.
For more information about how to get a copy of the instructor’s manual and the
question bank, please send an email message to sem@mheducation.com. In the
United States, you may call 800-338-3987. The McGraw-Hill web site for this book
is www.mhhe.com/silberschatz.

Contacting Us
We have endeavored to eliminate typos, bugs, and the like from the text. But, as in new
releases of software, bugs almost surely remain; an up-to-date errata list is accessible
from the book’s web site. We would appreciate it if you would notify us of any errors
or omissions in the book that are not on the current list of errata.
We would be glad to receive suggestions on improvements to the book. We also

welcome any contributions to the book web site that could be of use to other read-
ers, such as programming exercises, project suggestions, online labs and tutorials, and

teaching tips.

Email should be addressed to db-book-authors@cs.yale.edu. Any other corre-
spondence should be sent to Avi Silberschatz, Department of Computer Science, Yale

University, 51 Prospect Street, P.O. Box 208285, New Haven, CT 06520-8285 USA.
Acknowledgments
Many people have helped us with this seventh edition, as well as with the previous six
editions from which it is derived, and we are indebted to all of them.
Seventh Edition
• Ioannis Alagiannis and Renata Borovica-Gajic for writing Chapter 32 on the
PostgreSQL database, which is available online. The chapter is a complete rewrite
of the PostgreSQL chapter in the 6th edition, which was authored by Anastasia
Ailamaki, Sailesh Krishnamurthy, Spiros Papadimitriou, Bianca Schroeder, Karl
Schnaitter, and Gavin Sherry.
• Judi Paige for her help in generating figures, presentation slides, and with handling
the copy-editing material.
• Mark Wogahn for making sure that the software to produce the book, including
LaTeX macros and fonts, worked properly.

xxvi Preface

• Sriram Srinivasan for discussions and feedback that have immensely benefited the
chapters on parallel and distributed databases.
• N. L. Sarda for his insightful feedback on the sixth edition, and on some sections
of the seventh edition.

• Bikash Chandra and Venkatesh Emani for their help with updates to the applica-
tion development chapter, including creation of sample code.

• Students at IIT Bombay, particularly Ashish Mithole, for their feedback on draft
versions of the chapters on parallel and distributed databases.
• Students at Yale, Lehigh, and IIT Bombay, for their comments on the sixth edition.

• Jeffrey Anthony, partner and CTO, Synaptic; and Lehigh students Corey Ca-
plan (now co-founder, Leavitt Innovations); Gregory Cheng; Timothy LaRowe;

and Aaron Rotem for comments and suggestions that have benefited the new
blockchain chapter.

Previous Editions

• Hakan Jakobsson (Oracle), for writing the chapter on the Oracle database sys-
tem in the sixth edition; Sriram Padmanabhan (IBM), for writing the chapter de-
scribing the IBM DB2 database system in the sixth edition; and Sameet Agarwal,

Jos ́e A. Blakeley, Thierry D’Hers, Gerald Hinson, Dirk Myers, Vaqar Pirzada, Bill
Ramos, Balaji Rathakrishnan, Michael Rys, Florian Waas, and Michael Zwilling
for writing the chapter describing the Microsoft SQL Server database system in
the sixth edition; and in particular Jos ́e Blakeley, who sadly is no longer amongst
us, for coordinating and editing the chapter; and C ́esar Galindo-Legaria, Goetz
Graefe, Kalen Delaney, and Thomas Casey for their contributions to the previous
edition of the Microsoft SQL Server chapter. These chapters, however, are not part
of the seventh edition.
• Anastasia Ailamaki, Sailesh Krishnamurthy, Spiros Papadimitriou, Bianca
Schroeder, Karl Schnaitter, and Gavin Sherry for writing the chapter on
PostgreSQL in the sixth edition.
• Daniel Abadi for reviewing the table of contents of the fifth edition and helping
with the new organization.

• Steve Dolins, University of Florida; Rolando Fernanez, George Washington Uni-
versity; Frantisek Franek, McMaster University; Latifur Khan, University of Texas

at Dallas; Sanjay Madria, Missouri University of Science and Technology; Aris
Ouksel, University of Illinois; and Richard Snodgrass, University of Waterloo; who

served as reviewers of the book and whose comments helped us greatly in formu-
lating the sixth edition.

Preface xxvii

• Judi Paige for her help in generating figures and presentation slides.
• Mark Wogahn for making sure that the software to produce the book, including
LaTeX macros and fonts, worked properly.
• N. L. Sarda for feedback that helped us improve several chapters. Vikram Pudi for
motivating us to replace the earlier bank schema; and Shetal Shah for feedback on
several chapters.
• Students at Yale, Lehigh, and IIT Bombay, for their comments on the fifth edition,
as well as on preprints of the sixth edition.
• Chen Li and Sharad Mehrotra for providing material on JDBC and security for the
fifth edition.
• Marilyn Turnamian and Nandprasad Joshi provided secretarial assistance for the
fifth edition, and Marilyn also prepared an early draft of the cover design for the
fifth edition.
• Lyn Dupr ́e copyedited the third edition and Sara Strandtman edited the text of the
third edition.
• Nilesh Dalvi, Sumit Sanghai, Gaurav Bhalotia, Arvind Hulgeri K. V. Raghavan,
Prateek Kapadia, Sara Strandtman, Greg Speegle, and Dawn Bezviner helped to
prepare the instructor’s manual for earlier editions.
• The idea of using ships as part of the cover concept was originally suggested to us
by Bruce Stephan.
• The following people offered suggestions and comments for the fifth and earlier
editions of the book. R. B. Abhyankar, Hani Abu-Salem, Jamel R. Alsabbagh,
Raj Ashar, Don Batory, Phil Bernhard, Christian Breimann, Gavin M. Bierman,
Janek Bogucki, Haran Boral, Paul Bourgeois, Phil Bohannon, Robert Brazile, Yuri
Breitbart, Ramzi Bualuan, Michael Carey, Soumen Chakrabarti, Tom Chappell,

Zhengxin Chen, Y. C. Chin, Jan Chomicki, Laurens Damen, Prasanna Dhan-
dapani, Qin Ding, Valentin Dinu, J. Edwards, Christos Faloutsos, Homma Far-
ian, Alan Fekete, Frantisek Franek, Shashi Gadia, Hector Garcia-Molina, Goetz

Graefe, Jim Gray, Le Gruenwald, Eitan M. Gurari, William Hankley, Bruce

Hillyer, Ron Hitchens, Chad Hogg, Arvind Hulgeri, Yannis Ioannidis, Zheng Ji-
aping, Randy M. Kaplan, Graham J. L. Kemp, Rami Khouri, Hyoung-Joo Kim,

Won Kim, Henry Korth (father of Henry F.), Carol Kroll, Hae Choon Lee, Sang-
Won Lee, Irwin Levinstein, Mark Llewellyn, Gary Lindstrom, Ling Liu, Dave

Maier, Keith Marzullo, Marty Maskarinec, Fletcher Mattox, Sharad Mehrotra, Jim
Melton, Alberto Mendelzon, Ami Motro, Bhagirath Narahari, Yiu-Kai Dennis Ng,
Thanh-Duy Nguyen, Anil Nigam, Cyril Orji, Meral Ozsoyoglu, D. B. Phatak, Juan
Altmayer Pizzorno, Bruce Porter, Sunil Prabhakar, Jim Peterson, K. V. Raghavan,
Nahid Rahman, Rajarshi Rakshit, Krithi Ramamritham, Mike Reiter, Greg Ric-

xxviii Preface

cardi, Odinaldo Rodriguez, Mark Roth, Marek Rusinkiewicz, Michael Rys, Sunita
Sarawagi, N. L. Sarda, Patrick Schmid, Nikhil Sethi, S. Seshadri, Stewart Shen,
Shashi Shekhar, Amit Sheth, Max Smolens, Nandit Soparkar, Greg Speegle, Jeff
Storey, Dilys Thomas, Prem Thomas, Tim Wahls, Anita Whitehall, Christopher
Wilson, Marianne Winslett, Weining Zhang, and Liu Zhenming.
Personal Notes
Sudarshan would like to acknowledge his wife, Sita, for her love, patience, and support,
and children Madhur and Advaith for their love and joie de vivre. Hank would like to

acknowledge his wife, Joan, and his children, Abby and Joe, for their love and under-
standing. Avi would like to acknowledge Valerie for her love, patience, and support

during the revision of this book.
A. S.
H. F. K.
S. S.